>> Woodruff: AN INTERNAL REPORT
AT GENERAL MOTORS DESCRIBES A
PATTERN OF INCOMPETENCE AND
NEGLECT THAT LED TO DEADLY
IGNITION SWITCH PROBLEMS.
C.E.O. MARY BARRA HAS FIRED 15
EMPLOYEES, BUT DENIED A LARGER
COVER-UP.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, NEW
DETAILS EMERGE ABOUT ARMY SGT.
BOWE BERGHDAL.
HOW HE CAME TO BE IN CAPTIVITY
AND HOW HE WAS RESCUED.
AS PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID HE
"ABSOLUTELY MAKES NO APOLOGIES"
FOR THE DEAL THAT GOT BERGHDAL
BACK.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, THE
TRANSFORMATION OF NEW ORLEANS
PUBLIC SCHOOLS INTO THE NATION'S
FIRST ALL-CHARTER SYSTEM.
ADMINISTRATORS POINT TO A
BRIGHTER FUTURE, BUT OTHERS FEAR
SOME STUDENTS MAY BE LEFT
BEHIND.
>> YOU KNOW, YOU CAN FIND
PEOPLE WHO THINK WHAT HAS
HAPPENED IS THE GREATEST
THING TO OCCUR IN THE
HISTORY OF URBAN EDUCATION
AND PEOPLE WHO THINK IT'S
THE WORST THING.
I THINK PEOPLE, MOST PEOPLE
WHO ARE BEING HONEST WILL
ADMIT IT'S SOMEPLACE IN THE
MIDDLE
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S "PBS NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: TWO SENIOR SENATORS
AGREED TODAY ON A BIPARTISAN
BILL TO ADDRESS LONG DELAYS FOR
VETERANS SEEKING MEDICAL CARE.
THOSE WHO WAIT LONGER THAN 30
DAYS FOR APPOINTMENTS OR LIVE
MORE THAN 40 MILES FROM A V.A.
FACILITY COULD USE PRIVATE
DOCTORS ENROLLED IN MEDICARE OR
OTHER FEDERAL PROGRAMS.
REPUBLICAN JOHN MCCAIN OF
ARIZONA AND INDEPENDENT BERNARD
SANDERS OF VERMONT SPONSORED THE
LEGISLATION.
>> YOU WILL BE ABLE TO GO TO THE
DOCTOR OF YOUR CHOICE, UNDER THE
STRICT SUPERVISIONS OF THE V.A.
THIS IS A BILL MOSTLY FOR PEOPLE
IN VERY RURAL AREAS WHO NOW HAVE
TO TRAVEL LONG DISTANCES TO GET
THE HEALTH CARE, THIS WILL MAKE
THEIR LIVES EASIER.
>> Ifill: ALSO TODAY, ACTING
V.A. SECRETARY SLOAN GIBSON
VISITED THE PHOENIX MEDICAL
CENTER WHERE REPORTS OF
FALSIFYING DATA AND SECRET
WAITING LISTS FIRST SURFACED.
MEANWHILE, THE PRESIDENT'S
NOMINEE TO FILL THE TOP HEALTH
CARE POSITION AT THE VETERANS
AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT WITHDREW
TODAY.
JEFFREY MURAWSKY SAID HE FEARED
A LONG SENATE CONFIRMATION
FIGHT.
>> Woodruff: THERE IS NO FIGHT
OVER SYLVIA BURWELL, THE SENATE
CONFIRMED HER TODAY AS THE NEW
SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES.
SHE HAD BEEN THE PRESIDENT'S
BUDGET DIRECTOR.
BURWELL TAKES OVER FROM KATHLEEN
SEBELIUS WHO OVERSAW THE
DIFFICULT ROLLOUT OF THE
healthcare.gov WEBSITE LAST
YEAR.
>> Ifill: IN IRAQ, SUNNI
FIGHTERS STEPPED UP ATTACKS IN
THE NORTH AGAINST FORCES OF THE
SHIITE DOMINATED GOVERNMENT.
DOZENS OF GUNMEN AMBUSHED
SECURITY CHECKPOINTS AND POLICE
STATIONS IN SAMARRA, STARTING A
DAY LONG BATTLE.
SEVEN POLICE AND SOLDIERS WERE
KILLED.
THE MILITANTS HAVE ALREADY
SEIZED PARTS OF RAMADI AND MOST
OF FALLUJAH.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA AND
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER DAVID
CAMERON HAD A NEW WARNING FOR
RUSSIA TODAY:WEAPONS FROM ENTERG
UKRAINE, RECOGNIZE THE NEW
LEADER IN KIEV AND STOP
SUPPORTING PRO-RUSSIAN
SEPARATISTS OR FACE NEW
SANCTIONS.
THE LEADERS MET AS PART OF THE
"GROUP OF SEVEN" SUMMIT IN
BRUSSELS WITHOUT RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID PUTIN CAN
CHOOSE TO REBUILD TRUST OR NOT.
>> WE WILL HAVE A CHANCE TO SEE
WHAT MR. PUTIN DOES OVER THE
NEXT TWO, THREE, FOUR WEEKS, AND
IF HE REMAINS ON THE CURRENT
COURSE, THEN WE'VE ALREADY
INDICATED THAT KINDS OF ACTIONS
THAT WE'RE PREPARED TO TAKE.
>> Woodruff: PUTIN ANSWERED BY
WISHING THE G7 LEADERS "BON
APPETIT" BEFORE FLYING FROM ST.
PETERSBURG TO FRANCE FOR
TOMORROW'S D-DAY COMMEMORATIONS.
>> Ifill: THERE'S WORD OF MORE
MASS KILLINGS IN NIGERIA BY THE
ISLAMIST TERROR GROUP BOKO
HARAM.
WITNESSES SAID MILITANTS DRESSED
AS SOLDIERS SLAUGHTERED AT LEAST
200 PEOPLE IN THE COUNTRY'S
NORTHEAST ON MONDAY.
LATER, POLICE SAID 42 MORE
PEOPLE WERE KILLED EARLY TODAY.
>> Woodruff: CHINESE COURTS
SENTENCED 81 PEOPLE TODAY ON
TERROR CHARGES IN AN ONGOING
CRACKDOWN IN THE WESTERN REGION
OF XINJIANG.
STATE MEDIA SAID THEY PLANNED
TERRORIST ACTIVITIES AND CARRIED
OUT MURDER AND ARSON.
THEY ARE AMONG SCORES OF PEOPLE
WHO'VE BEEN ARRESTED AFTER A
SERIES OF DEADLY ATTACKS BLAMED
ON ETHNIC UIGHURS.
>> Ifill: VIETNAM HAS RELEASED
NEW VIDEO TO PROVE ITS CLAIMS OF
CHINESE AGGRESSION IN THE SOUTH
CHINA SEA.
THE FOOTAGE SHOWS A CHINESE SHIP
CHASING AND THEN RAMMING A
VIETNAMESE FISHING BOAT ON MAY
26TH.
THE FISHING BOAT THEN TIPPED
OVER AND SANK, BUT ALL TEN
PEOPLE ABOARD WERE RESCUED.
IT HAPPENED NEAR A HUGE OIL RIG
THAT CHINA DEPLOYED LAST MONTH
IN DISPUTED WATERS.
>> Woodruff: THE LATEST PROBE OF
THE DEEPWATER HORIZON OIL SPILL
IN THE GULF OF MEXICO CONCLUDES
A GIANT MACHINE THAT COULD HAVE
PREVENTED THE 2010 DISASTER WAS
RIDDLED WITH DEFECTS.
THE U.S. CHEMICAL SAFETY BOARD
SAID TODAY THE BLOWOUT PREVENTER
ON THE MACONDO WELL FAILED
BECAUSE IT HAD FAULTY WIRING, A
DEAD BATTERY AND A BENT PIPE.
IT SAID SIMILAR DEVICES ARE
STILL BEING USED WORLDWIDE.
>> Ifill: IN ECONOMIC NEWS,
EUROPEAN BANKS WILL START PAYING
FEES ON DEPOSITS WITH THE
EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK.
THE NEGATIVE INTEREST RATE COULD
PUSH THEM TO LEND THE MONEY
INSTEAD AND STAVE OFF DEFLATION.
THE CHAIR OF THE SECURITIES AND
EXCHANGE COMMISSION, MARY JO
WHITE, PROPOSED NEW RULES TO
REIN IN HIGH-SPEED TRADING.
AND ON WALL STREET, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINED
98 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 16,836;
THE NASDAQ ROSE 44 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,296; AND THE S&P 500
ADDED 12 TO FINISH AT 1,940.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
G.M.'s PROBE INTO THE RECALLS OF
MILLIONS OF FAULTY CARS.
NEW DETAILS IN THE STORY OF ARMY
SGT. BOWE BERGDAHL.
PLUS, NEW ORLEANS MOVE TO ALL
CHARTER PUBLIC SCHOOL DISTRICT.
AND POSSIBLE SWEEPING CHANGES TO
HOW U.S. FINANCIAL MARKETS ARE
REGULATED.
>> Woodruff: GENERAL MOTORS
RELEASED ITS OWN INTERNAL REPORT
TODAY ABOUT A DECADE-LONG
FAILURE TO RECALL CARS WITH
IGNITION SWITCH PROBLEMS.
THE INVESTIGATION FOUND A
DYSFUNCTIONAL SYSTEM WITHIN THE
AUTOMAKER THAT DIDN'T TAKE
ENOUGH RESPONSIBILITY FOR YEARS.
BUT IT ALSO ABSOLVED THE VERY
TOP LEADERSHIP OF ANY KIND OF
COVER UP.
>> WHAT VALUKAS FOUND IN THIS
SITUATION WAS A PATTERN OF
INCOMPETENCE AND NEGLECT.
>> Woodruff: GENERAL MOTORS
C.E.O. MARY BARRA LAID OUT THE
MUCH ANTICIPATED REPORT BY
FORMER FEDERAL PROSECUTOR ANTON
VALUKAS.
SHE TOLD G.M. EMPLOYEES IN
WARREN, MICHIGAN, THE FINDINGS
ARE, "BRUTALLY TOUGH AND DEEPLY
TROUBLING."
>> REPEATEDLY, INDIVIDUALS
FAILED TO DISCLOSE CRITICAL
PIECES OF INFORMATION THAT COULD
HAVE FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGED THE
LIVES OF THOSE IMPACTED BY THE
FAULTY IGNITION SWITCH.
>> Woodruff: THAT LONG-RUNNING
IGNITION SWITCH DEFECT, GOING
BACK TO 2002, IS NOW LINKED TO
AT LEAST 13 DEATHS, AND FEDERAL
OFFICIALS SAY THE NUMBER MAY
RISE.
SINCE FEBRUARY, G.M. HAS
RECALLED 2.6 MILLION OLDER CARS
BECAUSE OF THE PROBLEM, WHICH
CAUSED ENGINES TO STALL, AIR
BAGS TO FAIL AND POWER STEERING
AND BRAKES TO MALFUNCTION.
BARRA ACKNOWLEDGED THE AUTO
MAKER FACES PUBLIC OUTRAGE THAT
IT TOOK SO LONG TO ACT.
>> THIS RECALL ISSUE ISN'T
MERELY AN ENGINEERING, OR A
MANUFACTURING, OR A LEGAL
PROBLEM.
IT REPRESENTS A FUNDAMENTAL
FAILURE TO MEET THE BASIC NEEDS
OF THESE CUSTOMERS.
>> Reporter: THE C.E.O.
ANNOUNCED 15 EMPLOYEES FOUND TO
HAVE ACTED INAPPROPRIATELY HAVE
BEEN FIRED.
MORE THAN HALF WERE IN SENIOR OR
EXECUTIVE ROLES.
AT THE SAME TIME, SHE MAINTAINED
THERE WAS NO CONSPIRACY AT THE
TOP TO COVER UP FACTS AND NO
EVIDENCE THAT EMPLOYEES MADE ANY
TRADE OFF BETWEEN SAFETY AND
COST.
BARRA SAID IT'S STILL NOT CLEAR
WHY ENGINEERS AND OTHERS LARGELY
IGNORED A PROBLEM THAT WOULD
HAVE COST 57 CENTS TO REPAIR.
>> IF THIS INFORMATION HAD BEEN
DISCLOSED, AND I BELIEVE THIS IN
MY HEART, THE COMPANY WOULD HAVE
DEALT WITH THIS SITUATION MUCH
DIFFERENTLY AND APPROPRIATELY.
>> Reporter: WITH G.M.'s
FINDINGS IN HAND, CONGRESS IS
EXPECTED TO ANNOUNCE A NEW ROUND
OF HEARINGS.
BUT SOME LAWMAKERS ARE ALREADY
CALLING THE COMPANY'S REPORT
PART OF A PUBLIC RELATIONS
CAMPAIGN.
DEMOCRATIC SENATOR RICHARD
BLUMENTHAL OF CONNECTICUT.
>> THIS REPORT LEAVES SO MANY
QUESTIONS UNANSWERED AND FAILS
TO IDENTIFY WHERE RESPONSIBILITY
REALLY SHOULD BE PLACED.
FIRING A FEW UNDERLINGS IS NO
SUBSTITUTE FOR ACKNOWLEDGING
MORAL AND LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY.
AND THIS DOCUMENT SEEMS MORED FE
COMPANY IN COURT THAN
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FOR
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE MORE THAN
13 DEATHS THAT THE COMPANY SO
FAR REFUSES TO ACKNOWLEDGE.
>> Reporter: GOING FORWARD, G.M.
HAS CREATED A FUND TO COMPENSATE
VICTIMS, LED BY LAWYER KENNETH
FEINBERG.
THE NAMES HAVE NOT BEEN
OFFICIALLY RELEASED.
BUT IN APRIL, WHEN BARRA
APPEARED AT A SENATE HEARING,
FAMILIES ALSO TRAVELED TO
WASHINGTON, HOLDING UP PICTURES
OF LOVED ONES KILLED OR INJURED.
>> WE ARE THE PEOPLE LEFT BEHIND
WHEN A LOVED ONE GOT INTO WHAT
WAS SUPPOSED TO BE A SAFE CAR.
A G.M. CAR.
A CAR THAT G.M. KNEW FOR YEARS
WAS DANGEROUS AND DEFECTIVE.
>> Reporter: G.M. HAS ALREADY
PAID A RECORD $35 MILLION DOLLAR
FINE, AND THE IGNITION SWITCH
RECALL, PLUS OTHERS, HAVE COST
THE COMPANY ABOUT $1.7 BILLION
DOLLARS SO FAR.
AT HER PRESS CONFERENCE, MARY
BARRA DID NOT GO DEEPLY INTO THE
CULTURE OF G.M. THAT VALUKAS
DESCRIBED IN HIS REPORT.
ONE WHERE, HE WROTE, "NO SINGLE
PERSON OWNED ANY DECISION,"
AND THERE WAS, "A PHENOMENON
KNOWN AS THE G.M. NOD, EVERYONE
NODS IN AGREEMENT AND THE NOD IS
AN EMPTY GESTURE."
MORE ON ALL OF THIS WITH TWO
WATCHING IT CLOSELY.
MICKI MAYNARD IS A CONTRIBUTOR
TO FORBES MAGAZINE.
SHE'S THE NEW DIRECTOR OF THE
REYNOLDS CENTER FOR BUSINESS
JOURNALISM AT THE CRONKITE
SCHOOL AT ARIZONA STATE
UNIVERSITY.
AND ERIC GORDON IS A PROFESSOR
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ROSS SCHOOL OF BUSINESS.
WELCOME YOU BOTH.
MIKI, DO YOU BOTH, WHAT DID
YOU LEARN FROM THIS INTERNAL
REPORT THAT WASN'T KNOWN
BEFORE?
>> WELL, WHAT I LEARNED IS
THAT GENERAL MOTORS DOESN'T
REALLY HAVE A WAY TO EXPLAIN
WHAT HAPPENED.
IT'S VERY INTERESTING
BECAUSE THERE IS A LOT OF
MATERIAL, A LOT OF E-MAILS,
SLIDES, THAT SORT OF THING.
BUT WHAT WE DON'T FIND OUT
IS WHY THESE GENERAL MOTORS
EMPLOYEES REALLY DIDN'T PUSH
TO GET THIS MATTER RESOLVED.
AND MARY BEFOREA WAS ASKED
ABOUT THIS TODAY, WAS IT
FEAR, WAS IT INTIM DECISION
AN SHE JUST SORT OF SKIRTED
THE PROBLEM.
SO THAT'S THE ANSWER THAT
I'M LOOKING FOR AND WE DON'T
HAVE HAVE IT YET.
>> DID YOU HEAR AN ANSWER TO
THAT QUESTION?
>> I DIDN'T HEAR IT BUT I
MAY HAVE READ A CLUE TO IT
IN THE REPORT.
A GM EMPLOYEE NAMED STEVEN
OAKLEY SAID OCCASIONALLY
TRIED TO GET THE ATTENTION
OF HIGHER UPS BY USING WHAT
HE CALLED HOT WARDS, AND HE
GAVE AN EXAMPLE, STALL.
HE SAID THAT HE WAS
RELUCTANT TO PUSH ON SAFETY
ISSUES BECAUSE HE THOUGHT
HIS PREDECESSOR HAD BEEN
PUSHED OUT FOR HAVING DONE
JUST THAT.
I THINK THAT MIGHT BE A CLUE
TO WHAT THE PROBLEM WAS AT
GM.
>> WELL IS THAT, IS THAT
COMING THROUGH S THAT BEING
ACKNOWLEDGED BY THE
LEADERSHIP OF GM?
>> NO, I THINK THEY WENT TO
GREAT PAINS TO DO THE
OPPOSITE.
RIGHT IN THE OPENING THE
C.E.O. SAID THE REAL PROBLEM
HERE IS THAT LOWER LEVEL
PEOPLE DIDN'T DO WHATEVER IT
TOOK TO GET IT TO THE
ATTENTION OF THE HIGH LEVEL
PEOPLE, IT'S THE FAULT OF
THE LOW LEVEL PEOPLE.
THEY DIDN'T BANG THE DRUMS
LOUDLY ENOUGH.
WELL, WE HAVE AT LEAST FROM
ONE PERSON SOME IDEA ABOUT
THEY WHY THEY DON'T BANG THE
DRUMS LOUDLY ENOUGH AND THE
REST OF THE REPORT I THINK
YOU GET A SECOND IDEA WHICH
IS IT WILL TAKE A LOT OF
DRUM BANGING.
BECAUSE, IN FACT, A LOT OF
PEOPLE AT GM DID KNOW ABOUT
THE PROBLEM.
BATTED IT BACK AND FORTH AND
ALL OF THOSE ACTIONS
APPARENTLY SOMEHOW WEREN'T
ENOUGH TO GET IT TO THE
ATTENTION OF THELEVEL PEOPLE.
>> MIKI, THIS RAISES THE
QUESTION WHICH WE MENTIONED.
AND I WANT TO ASK YOU ABOUT
THIS.
CULTURE WHERE THERE'S A NOD
OR A GESTURE, WHAT WAS THAT
ALL ABOUT?
>> RIGHT SO, THERE WERE A
COUPLE OF INSTANCES THAT ARE
DEFINED IN THE REPORT.
ONE IS THE GM NOD,
APPARENTLY THIS IS WHERE
EVERYONE SITS IN A MEETING.
IDEAS ARE EXCHANGED,
SOLUTIONS ARE SUGGESTED.
EVERYONE NODS IN AGREEMENT,
LEAVES THE ROOM AND NOTHING
HAPPENS WHICH HAS TO BE
ABSOLUTELY MADDENING TO A
MANAGER.
AND THEN THE OTHER ONE IS
CALLED THE GM SALUTE AND I
HAVE WITNESSED THIS MYSELF
WHERE PEOPLE SIT WITH THEIR
ARMS CROSSED, SORT OF THEIR
ELBOWS POINTING OUT, ALMOST
DEFIANTLY AS IF TO SAY THIS
IS SOMEONE ELSE'S
RESPONSIBILITY, 9 ELBOWS
POINTING OUT AND NOT MINE.
AND YOU KNOW WHEN OUTSIDERS
CAN READ THE CULTURE LIKE
THAT I THINK YOU HAVE AN
ISSUE.
I THINK YOU HAVE AN ISSUE OF
PEOPLE WHO MAYBE SAY THEY'LL
DO SOMETHING, DON'T DO IT
AND THAT SHOWS THAT-- THEY
DON'T TRUST MANAGEMENT OR
THEY DON'T HAVE FAITH IN
EACH OTHER TO SOLVE THE
PROBLEM.
>> AND WE SHOULD HAVE
POINTED OUT, I MEANT TO SAY
THIS EARLIER, WE DID INVITE
GENERAL MOTORS TO SEND A
REPRESENTATIVE TO BE PART OF
THIS CONVERSATION.
THEY KLEINED.
PROFESSOR GORDEN, WHAT WE
WANT TO UNDERSTAND THOUGH IN
THE TWO OF YOU ARE GETTING
AT THIS IS WHAT WAS IT THAT
STOPPED THE INFORMATION
ABOUT THIS IGNITION SWITCH
THAT CLEARLY PEOPLE AT LOWER
LEVELS KNEW ABOUT, AS LONG
AS MORE THAN A DECADE AGO,
MAYBE 15 YEARS AGO, THAT
DIDN'T MOVE UP THE CHAIN?
>> I THINK THERE ARE TWO
THINGS.
AND THEY ARE SOMEWHAT
TOUCHED ON THE REPORT IF YOU
READ IT CAREFULLY.
ONE IS IT'S A HIGHLY
TECHNICAL LEGAL CULTURE.
FOR EXAMPLE, THEY SAID THAT
MARY BARRA REALLY DIDN'T
KNOW ANYTHING THAT WAS GOING
ON.
WELL, ACTUALLY, SHE KNEW
ABOUT THE STALLING, THE
MOVING STALL PROBLEM BUT SHE
DIDN'T KNOW THAT IT WAS
CAUSED BY THE IGNITION
SWITCH.
SO NO PROBLEM THERE.
SO I THINKS THERE A A VERY
TECHNICAL, WE WENT ON
TECHNICALLITIES KIND OF
CULTURE.
THERE'S ALSO A DON'T DO
ANYTHING THAT LOUSES UP A
PRODUCT LAUNCH.
THERE'S A STORY ABOUT AN
ATTORNEY WHO I THINK IS ONE
OF THE PEOPLE WHO LOST HIS
JOB, BILL KEMP WHO SOMEHOW
GETSES INVOLVED IN A STORY
THAT'S GOING TO BE RUN IN
THE CLEVELAND PLAIN DEALER
ABOUT THE COULD BALANCE AND
HE WANTS TO TRY TO DO
SOMETHING TO SOFTEN THE
STORY AND IS ADVISED BY
ANOTHER GM ATTORNEY THAT IT
PROBABLY WON'T WORK.
AND HIS COMMENT AS RELATED
IN THE REPORT IS SOMETHING
ALONG THE LINES OF WOW, IF
THIS STORY RUNS, WE HAD
BETTER NOT LOOK AS IF WE
HAVEN'T DONE EVERYTHING
POSSIBLE TO SUPPORT THE NEW
PRODUCT LAUNCH.
I THINK THOSE TWO FACTORS
COMBINED MAKE IT VERY
DIFFICULT TO EXPECT
INFORMATION THAT'S NEGATIVE
ABOUT A GM PRODUCT TO MAKE
IT UP THE LINE.
>> SO MIKI MAYNARD WHAT
ABOUT THESE 15 INDIVIDUALS
WHO WERE FIRED AND I GUESS
SOME OTHERS WEREUSPENDED.
HOW WOULD YOU CHARACTERIZE
THE ROLES THEY HAVE HAD IN
THE COMPANY AND WHY NO ONE
AT THE HIGHEST LEVEL IS
HAVING TO ANSWER FOR WHAT
HAPPENED?
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, ONE
OF THE PEOPLE WHO WAS FIRED
IS AN ENGINEER NAMED RAY
DIGEORGIA-- DIGIORGIO.
AND HE IS PROBABLY IN THE A
HOUSEHOLD NAME BUT A NAME
WELL-KNOWN TO US IN THE AUTO
INDUSTRY.
BECAUSE THIS IS THE FELLOW
THAT APPARENTLY APPROVED GM
CHANGING THE PART IN 2006
FOR REPAIR, BUT NOT CHANGING
THE PART NUMBER.
AS THE SISTER OF AN ENGINEER
I CAN TELL YOU THAT
ENGINEERS KEEP VERY CAREFUL
RECORDS.
AND YOU WOULD NOT MODIFY
DESIGN WITHOUT CHANGING THE
PART NUMBER.
BUT THAT MADE IT IMPOSSIBLE
THROUGH THE YEARS FOR
GENERAL MOTORS TO TELL WHICH
IGNITIONS WERE DEFECTIVE AND
WHICH ONES WERE OKAY.
AND THAT CONTINUED TO BE A
PROBLEM UNTIL LAST YEAR.
SO YOU HAVE SIX YEARS OF
INVESTIGATION GOING ON.
THE PART NUMBER SEEMS TO BE
FINE, THE DESIGN SEEMS TO BE
FINE.
AND THEY CAN'T FIND IT SO
HE'S ONE OF THE GENTLEMAN
THAT WAS LET GO.
THE HEAD OF THE COULD
BALANCE PROGRAM WAS
APPARENTLY LET GO.
OTHER PEOPLE IN LEGAL, IN
ENGINEERING, IN PUBLIC
POLICY WHICH USUALLY MEANS
WASHINGTON.
BUT ONE OF THE THINGS I
FOUND SO INTERESTING WAS
THAT THE REPORT SPECIFICALLY
SAYS THAT MARY BARRA, MIKE
MILLIKEN WHO IS THE HEAD OF
GM'S LEGAL DEPARTMENT AND
MARK ROYCE WHO IS HEAD OF
GLOBAL PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
ALL KNEW NOTHING ABOUT THIS.
THESE ARE THREE VERY SENIOR
PEOPLE AT THE COMPANY.
PEOPLE YOU WOULD THINK WOULD
BE GETTING BRIEFINGS ON
MATTERS LIKE THIS AND
INSTEAD APPARENTLY THE
INFORMATION NEVER GOT TO ANY
ONE OF THE THREE OF THEM AT
THE TOP OF THE COMPANY.
>> SO WITH JUST 30 SECONDS
LEFT, PROFESSOR GORDON O
WHAT ARE THE-- WE CAN EXPECT
THIS IS NOT THE END OF THIS.
>> IT IS CERTAINLY NOT GOING
TO BE.
IN FACT, I THINK TODAY,
ESPECIALLY THE PRESS
CONFERENCE THAT WAS HELD
TODAY PROBABLY DAMAGED GM.
I THINK THE LACK OF
TRANSPARENCY, THEY ALMOST
PEYTONLY SELF-SERVING
APPROACH THAT SEEMS TO HAVE
BEEN TAKEN HAS FIRED UP THE
CRITICS.
I THINK THERE WILL BE
HEARINGS.
I THINK THE HEARINGS WILL BE
PRETTY NASTY AND I THINK THE
EASY PATH THAT THE C.E.O.
GOT BECAUSE SHE WAS KNEW
WILL NOT BE AVAILABLE THE
NEXT TIME AROUND.
>> PROFESSOR ERIC GORDON,
MIKI MAYNARD WE THANK YOU
BOTH.
WE DID INVITE GENERAL
MOTORS.
THEY DECLINED TO
PARTICIPATE.
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Ifill: A WHITE HOUSE BRIEFING
CONTAINING MORE INFORMATION ON
THE DEAL TO FREE ARMY SGT BOWE
BERGDAHL FROM TALIBAN CAPTORS
HASN'T QUIETED MANY LAWMAKERS.
SO THE PRESIDENT AND OTHER
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS
LAUNCHED A VIGOROUS DEFENSE OF
THE PRISONER SWAP THAT LED TO
HIS RELEASE.
>> I MAKE ABSOLUTELY NO
APOLOGIES FOR MAKING SURE THAT
WE GET BACK A YOUNG MAN TO HIS
PARENTS.
>> Reporter: AFTER DAYS OF
RISING CRITICISM OVER THE
BERGDAHL DEAL, PRESIDENT OBAMA
PUSHED BACK.
>> I THINK IT WAS IMPORTANT FOR
PEOPLE TO UNDERSTAND THAT THIS
IS NOT SOME ABSTRACTION.
THIS IS NOT A POLITICAL
FOOTBALL.
>> Reporter: IN BRUSSELS, THE
PRESIDENT DEFENDED TRADING FIVE
SENIOR TALIBAN FIGURES AND NOT
TELLING CONGRESS IT WAS
IMMINENT.
>> WE HAD DISCUSSED WITH
CONGRESS THE POSSIBILITY THAT
SOMETHING LIKE THIS MIGHT OCCUR,
BUT BECAUSE OF THE NATURE OF THE
FOLKS THAT WE WERE DEALING WITH
AND THE FRAGILE NATURE OF THESE
NEGOTIATIONS, WE FELT IT WAS
IMPORTANT TO GO AHEAD AND DO
WHAT WE DID.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, IT WAS
REPORTED TODAY, OFFICIALS KEPT
THE PLANNED EXCHANGE QUIET IN
PART BECAUSE THE TALIBAN
THREATENED TO KILL BERGDAHL IF
IT BECAME PUBLIC.
>> Repor T
DEPARTMENT AND INTELLIGENCE
OFFICIALS MADE THAT CASE
TO SENATORS LAST NIGHT, IN A
CLOSED-DOOR BRIEFING.
THE MEETING INCLUDED A VIDEO
THAT REPORTEDLY SHOWED BERGDAHL
IN DECLINING HEALTH.
AFTERWARD, SOME SENATORS ON BOTH
SIDES, INCLUDING REPUBLICAN JOHN
MCCAIN, SAID THEY REMAINED
UNPERSUADED.
>> WE ARE GLAD THAT SERGEANT
BERGDAHL IS HOME, BUT THE
EXCHANGE OF FIVE HARDCORE,
HARDEST OF THE HARDCORE AL
QAEDA/TALIBAN, WILL POSE A
THREAT TO THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, AND THE MEN AND WOMEN
WHO ARE SERVING.
>> Reporter: BUT MCCAIN AND
OTHERS CRITICIZING THE DEAL ARE
NOW BEING ACCUSED OF CHANGING
THEIR POSITION ON A PRISONER
EXCHANGE.
IN FEBRUARY, FOR INSTANCE,
MCCAIN TOLD CNN HE'D, "SUPPORT
SUCH A THING DEPENDING ON A LOT
OF THE DETAILS."
THE DEMOCRATIC SENATE MAJORITY
LEADER HARRY REID ACCUSED THE
CRITICS OF PLAYING "POLITICAL
GAMES" WITH BERGDAHL'S RELEASE.
>> HE IS AN AMERICAN SOLDIER.
HE'S BEEN IN CAPTIVITY FOR FIVE
YEARS.
THE WAR IS WINDING DOWN.
LET'S BRING HIM HOME.
WE DID.
WE ALL KNOW THAT THE PRESIDENT
HAD A VERY SHORT PERIOD OF TIME
TO MAKE A DECISION.
HE MADE A DECISION TO BRING HIM
HOME, AND I'M GLAD HE DID.
>> Reporter: AS THE POLITICAL
FIGHTING OVER BERGDAHL HEATS UP,
NEW DETAILS HAVE EMERGED ABOUT
HIS TIME IN THE ARMY AND IN
CAPTIVITY.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTED
TODAY AN INVESTIGATION INTO HIS
2009 DISAPPEARANCE FOUND HE'D
LEFT FROM ASSIGNED AREAS TWICE
BEFORE.
AND "THE DAILY BEAST" REPORTED
BERGDAHL TRIED TO ESCAPE FROM
THE TALIBAN TWICE, SO HIS
CAPTORS MOVED HIM OFTEN AND
ADDED GUARDS MAKING IT HARDER TO
RESCUE HIM.
MEANWHILE, THE PENTAGON SAID
BERGDAHL'S HEALTH IS IMPROVING
DAILY AT A U.S. MILITARY
HOSPITAL IN GERMANY.
THERE'S NO INDICATION OF WHEN HE
MIGHT RETURN TO THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Ifill: JOINING ME NOW TO WALK
US THROUGH SOME OF THE
CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING
BERGDAHL'S TIME IN AFGHANISTAN
IS MATTHEW FARWELL.
HE IS A FORMER ARMY SOLDIER WHO
SERVED THERE AND HELPED REPORT A
2012 FEATURE ON BERGDAHL WITH
THE LATE JOURNALIST MICHAEL
HASTINGS, FOR ROLLING STONE
MAGAZINE.
MATTHEW FARWELL, THANK YOU
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> THE DEBATE IN WASHINGTON
IS COMPLETELY ABOUT WHETHER
BERGDAHL WAS A HOSTAGE OR
WHETHER HE WAS A HERO OR
WHETHER HE WAS A DESERTER.
IT SEEMS LIKE IT IS
SOMEWHERE IN BETWEEN, IT IS
A MORE COMPLICATED STORY
THAN THAT.
>> YEAH, IT'S A MORE
COMPLICATED AND MORE NUANCED
STORIMENT BUT AT THE END OF
THE DAY THE GUY WAS A U.S.
SOLDIER IN THE HANDS OF
SOMEBODY WE'RE FIGHTING
WITH.
AND REGARDLESS OF ANY OTHER
CIRCUMSTANCE, HE NEEDED TO
BE BROUGHT HOME.
AND BROUGHT BACK INTO U.S.
CUSTODY AND U.S.
JURISDICTION.
>> Ifill: LET'S GO BACK AND
TELL PEOPLE A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT WHO BOWE BERGDAHL IS.
WHO HE IS.
HOW DID HE COME TO BE IN THE
ARMY IN THE FIRST PLACE?
>> YOU KNOW, HE GREW UP IN
SUN VALLEY, IDAHO.
AND JOINED THE ARMY A LITTLE
BIT LATER ON IN LIFE, I
BELIEVE HE WAS ABOUT 23 WHEN
HE JOINED WHICH WAS THE SAME
AGE I WAS WHEN I JOINED.
AND I THINK YOU KNOW, HE
DIDN'T JUST JOIN THE ARMY,
HE JOINED THE INFANT REE AND
THE PARACHUTE INFANT REE AT
THAT.
AND SO LIKE A LOT OF PEOPLE,
I IMAGINE HE JOINED FOR MANY
DIFFERENT REASONS.
IDEALISM, THE SENSE OF
ADVENTURE, PATRIOTISM, YOU
KNOW, AND FRANKLY BECAUSE
THERE WAS A WAR ON AND SOME
PEOPLE NEED TO GO FIGHT IT.
>> Ifill: BUT BY THE TIME
THESE EVENTS CAME TO PASS HE
HAD BECOME DISILLUSIONED,
YOUR STORY, HOW IS THAT?
>> YEAH T SEEMS THAT HE
WASN'T HAPPY IN HIS PLATOON.
HE WASN'T HAPPY IN
AFGHANISTAN, APPARENTLY AN
HE MADE A VERY, VERY POOR
DECISION.
AND YOU KNOW, REALLY ENDURED
SOME CONSEQUENCES FOR THAT,
AND WILL FOR THE REST OF HIS
LIFE.
>> Ifill: THERE IS NO
QUESTION ANY MORE BUT THAT
HE WALKED AWAY FROM HIS
POST?
>> I MEAN, I DIDN'T THINK
THERE WAS MUCH QUESTION WHEN
WE WROTE THAT IN THE STORY
TWO YEARS AGO, ME AND
MICHAEL FOR ROLLING STONE.
>> Ifill: BUT THIS DEBATE
NOW IS ABOUT WHETHER HE
WALKED AWAY TO JOIN THE
TALIBAN, TO SOMEHOW CONNECT
WITH THEM OR JUST TO GET
AWAY FROM HIS SITUATION.
IS ANY LIGHT THAT HAS BEEN
SHED ON THAT?
>> YOU KNOW, I DON'T BELIEVE
THAT HE WALKED AWAY TO JOIN
THE TALIBAN.
AND I THINK THOSE DAILY
BEAST REPORTS THAT YOU
REFERENCED ON HIM TRYING TO
ESCAPE TWICE WOULD INDICATE
THAT AS WELL.
>> Ifill: LET ME TALK TO YOU
A LITTLE BIT ABOUT SOME OF
THE E-MAILS THAT HE
EXCHANGED WITH HIS PARENTS
WHICH ARE IN YOUR STORY
WHICH ILLUSTRATE HIS KIND OF
GROWING DISILLUSIONMENT.
IN THE LAST E-MAIL HE WRITES
THE FUTURE IS TOO GOOD TO
WASTE ON LIES.
HE'S TALKING ABOUT THE WAR
ITSELF.
>> YES, MA'AM.
>> Ifill: SO WHAT WAS IT
ABOUT THE CAR THAT
PARTICULARLY THROUGH HIM
OFF.
WHAT WAS IT ABOUT
WHAT WAS IT ABOUT COMBAT
THAT DISILLUSIONED HIM SO?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I DON'T
THINK IT WAS NECESSARILY
BATTLE OR COMBAT.
AND I DON'T KNOW FOR A FACT.
BUT I KNOW THAT I WAS IN THE
EXACT SAME AREA TWO YEARS
PRIOR AS AN INFANT REEMAN
AND BATTLE AND COMBAT IS
ACTUALLY FUN.
BUT THE WAR IN AFGHANISTAN
WAS A MASSIVE-- WE WOULD
CALL IT A CHARLIE FOXTROT IFI'MA
MASSIVE CLUSTER.
AND WE DIDN'T KNOW WHAT WE
WERE DOING THERE.
AND WE STILL DON'T.
AND THAT'S WHY WE'RE GETTING
OUT AND IT HAS BEEN THE
LONGEST WAR IN U.S. HISTORY.
>> HIS FATHER DESCRIBED BOWE
BERGDAHL IN PARTICULAR AS
BEING PSYCHOLOGICALLY
ISOLATED.
WAS THAT TRUE ALSO OF A LOT
OF THE MEN AND WOMEN WHO
WERE FIGHTING, ESPECIALLY IN
THAT AREA OF AFGHANISTAN?
>> YOU KNOW, SOME PLATOONS
HAVE GOOD UNIT COHESION,
SOME PEOPLE GET ALONG.
SOME PEOPLE DON'T.
AND SO I CAN'T NECESSARILY
MAKE A CASE FOR ANYONE ELSE
BUT MYSELF.
AND I HAD A GOOD TIME WITH
MY PLATOON MATES.
AND YOU KNOW, I LOVE THEM
ALL LIKE BROTHERS.
BUT LOOK AT OTHER SOLDIERS
LIKE ROBERT BALES, FOR
INSTANCE, WHO WALKED OFF HIS
POST AND MURDERED 16 AFGHAN,
YOU KNOW, WOMEN AN CHILDREN
IN KANDAHAR.
YOU KNOW, SOLDIERS HAVE
PROBLEMS.
>> Ifill: IN THIS CASE --
>> SOME OF THEM.
>> Ifill: IN THIS CASE AFTER
HE WALKED OFF YOUR REPORT
WRITES THAT HE WAS ACTUALLY
SEEN BY AFGHAN VILLAGERS
THAT PEOPLE SAW HIM, WHAT
WAS HIS STATE OF MIND THAT
WE KNOW.
>> I CAN'T SPEAK TO THAT,
MA'AM, I DON'T KNOW.
>> Ifill: I'M JUST
REFERENCING THE STORY THAT
YOU WROTE IN ROLLING STONE
WHICH TALKED ABOUT THE FACT
THAT HE SEEMED KIND OF
DAZED.
SO NEGOTIATIONS THAT WENT ON
TO FINALLY FREE HIM ABOUT
THE PRISONER SWAP, THIS HAS
BEEN GOING ON FOR SOME TIME.
>> RIGHT.
WE WROTE IN THE STORY THAT
YOU KNOW THE SENATE FOREIGN
RELATIONS COMMITTEE HAS BEEN
DEBATING IT AT THAT TIME AND
McCAIN HASN'T FLIP-FLOPPED
IN THE PAST COUPLE OF
MONTHS.
HE WAS SAYING PRETTY CRAZY
STUFF BACK THEN, CALLING HIM
THE FIVE WORSE HUMAN-RIGHTS
ABUSERS AND HUMAN HISTORY.
AND JOHN KERRY WAS ACTUALLY
THE VOICE OF REASON THERE
WHICH IS BIZARRE TO ME.
>> OKAY.
WELL, JUST FOR THE RECORD WE
HAVE INVITED JOHN McCAIN AND
OTHERS TO BE ON THE PROGRAM
AND WILL CONTINUE.
MATTHEW FARWELL, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU
>> Woodruff: AS THE SCHOOL YEAR
COMES TO A CLOSE ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, ONE OF THE ISSUES
THAT'S BEEN GRABBING MAJOR
ATTENTION IN A NUMBER OF CITIES
THIS YEAR IS THE CONTINUING
GROF CHARTER SCHOOLS.
NEW ORLEANS HAS BEEN GROUND ZERO
FOR THIS CHANGE AND THE END OF
THIS SCHOOL YEAR MARKS A
HISTORIC MOMENT FOR THE CITY.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
>> IN SEPTEMBER, NEW ORLEANS
WILL BE HOME TO THE COUNTRY'S
FIRST ALL-CHARTER SCHOOL
DISTRICT.
IT'S AN EVOLUTION THAT BEGAN
MORE THAN A DECADE AGO.
AND WAS GREATLY ACCELERATED
AFTER THE DEVASTATION OF
HURRICANE KATRINA.
WHEN STATE OFFICIALS AND OTHERS
SEIZED THE OPPORTUNITY TO
OVERHAUL THE CITY'S TROUBLED
SYSTEM.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FOR
EDUCATION, JOHN MERROW, REPORTED
FOR US.EFFORT OVER THE YEARS IN
AND HAS NOW PRODUCED A
DOCUMENTARY, TITLED "RE-BIRTH."
HERE'S A SHORT CLIP THAT TAKES
US BACK TO EARLY DAYS FOR THE
CHARTER MOVEMENT, IN 2005.
>> DECEMBER 14th, 2005.
MUCH OF THE CITY IS STILL
DESERTED.
OLD PERRY WALKER HIGH SCHOOL,
ONE OF THE FEW SCHOOL
BUILDINGS TO ESCAPEIO
DAMAGE IS ABOUT TO REOPEN.
>> HOPEFULLY NEVER, EVER
AGAIN IN THE HISTORY OF THIS
COUNTRY-- WHERE ANY GROUP OF
FOLKS WILL BE GIVEN AN
OPPORTUNITY-- BECAUSE OF A
KATRINA OR SOME OTHER
NATURAL DISASTER.
BUT THE REALITY IS, WE HAD
THIS OPPORTUNITY, AND WE
NEED TO SEIZE THIS MOMENT.
>> WE HAVE TO BE ON MY TOES
WHEN THE KIDS COME.
IN AND YOU SET THE STAGE, WE
ALL KNOW THAT, IN ONE MONTH
YOU KNOW THAT THE FIRST DAY
SETS THE STAGE.
>> SOME US AS TEACHERS,
WE'RE GOING TO WANT TO GO
BACK THE WAY IT WAS DONE
BEFORE.
A LOT OF THE CHILDREN, YOU
KNOW, ARE GOING TO BE
EXPECTING THINGS TO LOOK
LIKE THEY DID BEFORE.
AND-- AND IT'S JUST GOING TO
BE INTERESTING HOW WE CAN
CREATE A NEW VISION OF,
WHO WE ARE AND WHAT WE WANT
TO BE.
>> WALKER'S REOPENING AS A
PUBLIC CHARTER SCHOOL.
THIS MEANT IT WAS NO LONGER
CONTROLLED BY THE LOCAL
SCHOOL BOARD ALTHOUGH
PUBLICLY FUNDED, IT WOULD BE
PRIVATELY RUN.
MORE LIKE A SMALL BUSINESS.
AND LIKE A BUSINESS, OLD
PERRY WALKER CHARTER SCHOOL
HAD A BOTTOM LINE TO EDUCATE
ITS STUDENTS.
IF IT FAILED TO DO THAT, IT
COULD LOSE ITS CHARTER AND
BE SHUT DOWN.
IT WAS A FAR CRY FROM THE
OLD WAY OF RUNNING SCHOOLS.
>> AND JOHN MER
AND JOHN MERROW JOINS US NOW.
ALSO WITH US IS SARAH CARR OF
THE "HECHINGER REPORT," AN
ONLINE EDUCATION NEWS SITE.
SHE'S AUTHOR OF "HOPE AGAINST
HOPE," A BOOK ABOUT NEW ORLEANS
CHARTER SCHOOLS.
JOHN, HELP US UNDERSTAND ALL
THIS.
I THINK YOU REFER TO NEW ORLEANS
LS
RATHER THAN A SCHOOL SYSTEM
EXPLAIN.
>> WELL, IT'S ALMOST ALL
CHARTER SCHOOLS.
THERE ARE STILL A FEW
TRADITIONAL SCHOOLS WITHIN
WHAT'S THE OLD ORLEANS
PARISH SCHOOL BOARD.
BUT THERE ARE ABOUT 88
SCHOOLS AND I THINK ALL BUT
FIVE OF THEM ARE CHARTER
SCHOOLS.
THEY'RE ABOUT 45,000
STUDENTS.
AND ALL BUT MAYBE 2500 GO TO
CHARTER SCHOOLS.
SO IT IS A SYSTEM OF
SCHOOLS.
>> AND SARAH CARR, HAS IT
BEEN A SMOOTH TRANSITION,
REMIND US, HAS THERE BEEN
OPPOSITION ALONG THE WAY.
WHERE ARE WE NOW WITH THAT?
>> YOU KNOW, YOU CAN FIND
PEOPLE WHO THINK WHAT HAS
HAPPENED IS THE GREATEST
THING TO OCCUR IN THE
HISTORY OF URBAN EDUCATION
AND PEOPLE WHO THINK IT'S
THE WORST THING.
I THINK MOST PEOPLE WHO ARE
BEING HONEST WILL ADMIT IT'S
SOMEPLACE IN THE MIDDLE.
AND I FOUND IN YEARS
REPORTING ON IT THAT IT'S
REALLY THE FAMILIES AT THE
GRASS ROOTS LEVEL WHO HAVE
THE MOST NUANCED AND
OF THE TIME.
>> AND SO JOHN, CONTINUING
JUST TO HELP US UNDERSTAND
WHAT IS GOING ON HERE, ONE
OF THE BIG QUESTIONS,
OBVIOUSLY, IS WHO IS IN
CHARGE NOW.
WHAT KIND OF ACCOUNTABILITY
IS THERE.
HOW MUCH POLITICAL ACCOUNT
ABILITY FOR THAT MATTER?
>> THAT'S A TERRIFIC
QUESTION.
THE BUREAU OF ELEMENTARY AND
SECONDARY EDUCATION IS
ULTIMATELY IN CHARGE OF MOST
OF THE CHARTERS.
THE METRIC IS VERY NARROW,
ITS TEST SCORES, IN FACT,
IT'S GOTTEN NARROWER PREK
THROUGH 6 SCHOOLS ARE JUDGED
100% BY THEIR PERFORMANCE ON
STATE TESTS.
IT USED TO BE 95% AND 5%
ATTENDANCE.
7 CHARTER SCHOOLS, I THINK
THAT'S THE NUMBER, SARAH MAY
HAVE A BETTER NUMBER.
BUT 7 CHARTER SCHOOLS HAVE
GONE OUT OF BUSINESS BECAUSE
THEY FAILED TO KEEP THE
PROMISE OS THEY MADE IN
ORDER TO GET THE CHARTER.
BUT THEY'VE DISCOVERED THEY
NEED SOME KIND OF CENTRAL
AUTHORITY.
AND THE CHARTER, THE
RECOVERY SCHOOL DISTRICT AND
THE OLD ORLEANS PARISH HAVE
JUST ENTERED INTO AN
AGREEMENT TO CODIFY THE
RULES SO THAT EVERYBODY
OBEYS THE SAME RULES.
AND THEY SET UP A FUND TO
PROVIDE EXTRA MONEY FOR VERY
EXPENSIVE SPECIAL NEEDS
KIDS.
SO THERE'S A COOPERATION AND
RECOGNITION.
THEY NEED SOME OVERSIGHT.
>> WELL, SARAH CARR,
CONTINUE ON THAT.
TELL US PORE ABOUT THAT
THEME.
BUT ALSO START US ON THE
SORT OF WHAT DO WE KNOW SO
FAR ABOUT THE RESULTS AT
THIS POINT, OF THIS SWITCH.
>> YEAH, WELL, THE PRINCIPALS
REALLY DO HAVE PRETTY
UNPRECEDENTED AUTONOMY AND
FLEXIBILITY TO HIRE AND FIRE
AND SET THEIR OWN CURRICULUM
AND THEIR OWN CALENDAR.
AND THEY HAVE INDIVIDUAL
BOARDS THAT OVERSEE THEM.
BUT THERE IS SOMETIMES A
CONFLICT OF INTEREST IF
THOSE BOARDS ARE APPOINTED
OR PICKED BY THE PRINCIPALS
SO I DO THINK THERE IS THIS
QUESTION MOVING FORWARD OF
HOW ACTIVE THE STATE BOARD
WILL BE IN OVERSEEING THE
SCHOOLS ON A DAILY BASIS.
THE OVERALL THE TEST SCORES
HAVE BEEN ON AN UPWARD
TREND.
AND THE DATA IS VERY HOTLY
DEBATED JUST BECAUSE IT'S
NOT AN APPLE TO APPLE
COMPARISON SINCE THOUSANDS
OF FAMILIES DID NOT COME
BACK AFTER KATRINA.
AND I THINK WE REALLY NEED
TO WATCH IN THE LONG-TERM TO
SEE WHAT COLLEGE GRADUATION
RATES LOOK LIKE AND NOT
ARRIVE AT SORT OF SNAP OR
QUICK CONCLUSIONS BASED ON
SHORT-TERM DATA.
>> JOHN, WHERE DO YOU THINK
THE RESULTS POINT TO SO FAR.
ANDAT LOOKING FOR
IN THE COMING YEARS?
>> WELL, I REPORTED FOR US
BEFORE KATRINA AND ITS WITH
A TERRIBLE SCHOOL SYSTEM, AN
F OR F MINUS.
IT'S NOW I WOULD THINK A C
OR A C MINEUS.
THE QUESTION IS RIGHT, YOU
HAVE TO KEEP TRACK OF THE
GRADUATION RECORDS.
THERE IS A NEW POLE THAT'S
COMING OUT NEXT WEEK FROM
THE COWAN INSTITUTE AT
TULANE.
AND THEY SUGGEST THAT ALMOST
50% OF THOSE POLLED SAY THE
SCHOOLS ARE EITHER IMPROVING
OR ARE GOOD.
AND ABOUT 18% SAY THEY ARE
ACTUALLY WORSE.
25% SAY THEY'RE ABOUT THE
SAME.
THEY DIVIDE EVENLY.
WOULD YOU RECOMMEND THE
SCHOOL TO A FRIEND, 45% SAY
THEY WOULD.
43.85 SAY THEY WOULD NOT.
SO YOU KNOW, IT IS
ONGOING EXPERIMENT.
THERE IS NO QUESTION ABOUT
THAT.
>> WELL, SO SARAH CARR, HOW
MUCH STABLE IS THERE IN THIS
NEW SYSTEM AND WHAT KIND OF
NEW PROBLEMS, PERHAPS, ARISE
WHEN YOU SHIFT TO AN ALMOST
ALL CHARTER SYSTEM.
>> WELL THERE HAS BEEN A
FAIR AMOUNT OF INSTABILITY
JUST IN THAT YOU HAVE
SCHOOLS THAT HAVE BEEN
PHASED-- PHASED OUT AND
CLOSED DOWN AND CONVERTED TO
CHARTER OPERATORS.
AND SO I HAVE-- YOU KNOW, I
HAVE MET FAMILIES WHO FOUND
MORE STRUCTURED AMBITIOUS
CHARTER SCHOOLS THAT THEY
LOVED.
AND I'VE MET ONES WHOSE
CHILDREN HAVE BEEN BOUNCED
BETWEEN FOUR OR FIVE SCHOOLS
JUST IN HIGH SCHOOL ALONE.AND IN
CHALLENGES MOVING FORWARD
WILL  MAKING SURE THAT THE
SCHOOLS ARE REACHING THE
MOST VULNERABLE CHILDREN AND
FAMILIES.
>> WHAT DO WE KNOW, JOHN
MERROW SO F, PUBLIC
ATTITUDES TOWARD THIS.
>> WELL, THAT'S INTERESTING.
THERE IS A GENERAL LEVEL, AS
I SAID, WOULD YOU RECOMMEND
YES, MAYBE NO, BUT 51% OF
THOSE POLLED AND AS I SAY
THIS COWAN INSTITUTE POLL
WILL COME OUT NEXT WEEK.
51% SAY THE SCHOOLS DO NOT
PREPARE THE KIDS FOR COLLEGE
AND 56% SAY THE SCHOOLS DO
NOT PREPARE THE KIDS FOR
WORK.
SO THERE'S A REAL LEVEL OF
DISSATISFACTION.
AND ONE OF THE STRIKINGTHINGS TW
ORLEANS, MUSIC IS THE
LIFEBLOOD.
THERE'S NO CHARTER SCHOOL
DEVOTED TO ART AND MUSIC.
THERE'S ONE THAT IS THE
CREATIVE ARTS.
AND THERE ARE 88 SCHOOLS IN
ALL.
SO I FIND IT STRIKING
BECAUSE THEY'RE SO OBSESSED
WITH TEST SCORES THAT THERE
ISN'T THE RICHNESS THAT YOU
WOULD EXPECT IN CHARTER
SCHOOLS.
SO I THINK THE CHALLENGE
GOING FORWARD WILL BE TO TRY
TO FIGURE OUT OUT A NEW
METRIC SO YOU CAN HAVE A
VARIETY OF SCHOOLS AND
PROVIDE KIDS WITH MORE
CHALLENGING EXPERIENCES.
>> AND SO-- SARAH JUST VERY
BRIEFLY, IF YOU COULD, IN
ASK AN EXPERIMENT BEING
WATCHED AS A MODEL IN OTHER
PLACES, RIGHT.
>> UH-HUH.
VERY MUCH SO.
AND I THINK A LOT OF THE
TENSIONS AND CHANGES THAT
ARE HAPPENING IN NEW ORLEANS
ARE HAPPENING AT A SMALLER
SCALE IN OTHER CITIES
INCLUDING THE GROWTH IN
CHARTER SCHOOLS AND
INCREASED RELIANCE ON TEACH
FOR AMERICA AND ALTERNATIVE
TEACHER PROGRAMS AND THIS
SORT OF ATTACK ON TEACHERS
UNIONS.
SO I THINK THAT IT, EVEN
THOUGH WHAT HAPPENED IN AND
THE WAY IT HAPPENED WAS VERY
UNIQUE IN OU-- NEW ORLEANS T
DEFINITELY HAD A LOT OF
IMPLICATIONS AS URBAN SCHOOL
SYSTEMS RESTRUCTURE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, SARAH
CARR, JOHN MERROW, THANK YOU
BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE RIGHT BACK
WITH A LOOK AT A POSSIBLE
CRACKDOWN BY THE SECURITY
EXCHANGE COMMISSION ON HIGH
SPEED COMPUTER DRIVEN TRADING.
BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE WEEK ON
P.B.S.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
FEDERAL AGENCY IS PROPOSING NEW
RULES FOR FINANCIAL MARKETS TO
HELP THEM ADDRESS CHANGES IN THE
WAY THE MAJORITY OF TRADING
TAKES PLACE TODAY.
DIZZYING CHANGES IN TECHNOLOGY
AND A LESSENING OF TRANSPARENCY.
THERE'S BEEN MOUNTING CONCERN
AMONG SOME EXPERTS IN PARTICULAR
ABOUT COMPUTER-DRIVEN HIGH-
FREQUENCY TRADING AFTER A
ONE DAY MARKET CRASH IN 2010 AND
A RECENT HIGH PROFILE BOOK ON
THE SUBJECT.
MARY JO WHITE, THE CHAIR OF THE
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION, LAID OUT NEW
PROPOSALS TO REGULATE THE MARKET
DURING A SPEECH TODAY.
REPORTER KERI GEIGER OF
BLOOMBERG NEWS IS HERE TO FILL
US IN.
WELCOME TO THE
PROGRAM.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH,
HAPPY TO BE HERE.
>> SO GIVE US A FULLER
PICTURE OF HOW THE MARKETS
HAVE CHANGED AND WHAT
PRECIPITATED ALL THIS.
>> WELL, THIS REALLY YOU
KNOW HIGH FREQUENCY TRADING
HAS BEEN A DISCUSSION FOR
MANY YEARS ESPECIALLY AFTER
THE FLASH CRASH.
AND IT REALLY QUIETED DOWN.
AND THEN IN MARCH 2014, THIS
YEAR, JUST A FEW MONTHS AGO
THE NEW YORK ATTORNEY
GENERAL ERIC SCHNEIDERMAN
OPEN ODD UP A BROAD
INVESTIGATION INTO HIGH
BEHIND THAT,DING AND SOME
INCLUDING THE TECHNOLOGIES
THAT REALLY DRIVE THIS
SUPERFAST TRADING WHERE TO
KIND OF FUTURE INTO
PERSPECTIVE.
IT'S ABOUT A THOUSAND TRADES
CAN HAPPEN IN THE BLINK OF
AN EYE WITH THIS COMPUTER
DRIVEN TRADING.
AND HIS INVESTIGATION AND
THE NEW YORK STATE ATTORNEY
GENERAL'S INVESTIGATION
COINCIDED WITH THE
PUBLICATION OF MICHAEL
LEWIS'S BOOK FLASH BOYS
WHICH OF COURSE BROUGHT THE
ISSUE OF HIGH FREQUENCY
TRADING TO THE GENERAL
PUBLIC AND REALLY SHOWED HOW
A LOT OF PEOPLE, AN THERE'S
A LOT OF CRITICS IN THIS
MARKET, AS WELL AS
PROPONENTS BUT THE CRITICS
ARE REALLY LOOKING AND
SAYING THAT THIS PROVIDES A
SMALL NUMBER OF TRADERS WITH
AN ENORMOUS VANTAGE OVER THE
GENERAL PUBLIC INCLUDING
RETAIL INVESTORS.
SO YOU KNOW, HERE WE ARE
TODAY.
THE AG INVESTIGATION, FLASH
BOYS AND NOW THE SEC IS
LIKELY RESPONDING TO A LOT
OF THAT PRESSURE AND IS
LOOKING AT WAYS THAT THEY
CAN ROLL OUT SOME NEW RULES
THAT WILLLY REIGN
RECENT IN WHAT IS CONSIDERED
SOME OF THE UNFAIR PRACTISE
OF HIGH FREQUENCY TRADING.
>> SO WHAT, I MEAN WITHOUT
GETTING IN TOO MUCH INTO THE
DETAILS WHAT IS IT THAT MARY
JO WHITE THE CHAIR WOULD
LIKE TO SEE DONE?
>> WELL, ONE OF THE MOST
SIGNIFICANT ONES WHICH WAS
HIGHLIGHTED BACK IN MARCH
WHEN THE AG OPENED THEIR
INVESTIGATION IS THE ISSUE
OF DARK POOLS.
DARK POOLS ARE RUN BY SOME
OF THE WALL STREET'S BIGGEST
BANKS.
IT'S ESSENTIALLY TRADING
BEHIND CLOSED DOORS.
YOU DON'T SEE HOW THE TSARE DON.
THE BUYING AND THE SELLING.
UNLIKE THE EXCHANGES WHICH
JUST SHOWS UP ON A PUBLIC
TICKER.
MARRY JO WHITE AND THE SEC
IS CALLING FOR SOME OF THE
TRADES AND THE WAYS TO DARK
POOLS ARE OPERATED TO HAVE
MORE DISCLOSURE AND
TRANSPARENCY.
ANOTHER THING IS THAT FIRMS
PROPRIETARY TRADING FIRMS
THAT ENGAGE IN HIGH
FREQUENCY TRADING HAVE TO
HAVE REGISTRATION AT THE SEC
THAT WOULD ESSENTIALLY MAKE
THEM ACCOUNTABLE TO SEC
RULES AND REGULATIONS.
ALSO, ORDER FLOW TYPES.
WHEN ORDERS ARE PUT IN
THROUGH CERTAIN ALTERNATIVE
TRADING VENUES THAT USE HIGH
FREQUENCY TRADING, THEY
DON'T NECESSARILY TELL THEIR
CUSTOMERS WHERE THEY ARE
BEING ROUTED.
AND NOT TO GET TOO TECHNICAL
BUT THAT IS ACTUALLY AN
ISSUE FOR A LOT OF CUSTOMERS
SO THEY WOULD LIKE TO HAVE
SOME TRANSPARENCY ON THAT.
SO THE BIG THEME THAT CAME
OUT.
SEC TODAY WITH THE PROPOSAL
OF RULES IS MORE
TRANSPARENCY IN THE MARKETS.
AND SO ARE THESE THE KINDS
OF CHANGES, KERI GEIGER THAT
ARE LIKELY TO BE ACCEPTED IN
THE FINANCIAL MARKET
COMMUNITY?
>> YOU KNOW, THE MARKET HAS
SURPRISINGLY BEEN PRETTY
ACCEPTING OF THE PROPOSAL
THAT THE MARKETS GET MORE
TRANSPARENT AND WE KIND OF
UNDERSTAND AND LEARN MORE
ABOUT HOW HIGH FREQUENCY
TRADING MIGHT CREATE UNFAIR
ADVANTAGES.
SO I THINK YOU'RE LIKELY GO
TO-- GOING TO SEE
CONSIDERING THAT THE
REGULATORS AS WELL AS THE
NEW YORK ATTORNEY GENERAL
AND OTHER, YOU KNOW, KIND OF
GOVERNMENT BODIES ARE REALLY
LOOKING AT WAYS TO KIND OF
OPEN THIS UP.
YOU ARE GOING TO SEE THE
MARKET SORT OF GETTING
BEHIND HIM ON THIS ALSO
MICHAEL LEWIS'S BOOK HAS HAD
A LOT OF INFLUENCE ON ITS
WAY THE PUBLIC LOOKS AT
THIS.
THERE IS A PUBLIC PERCEPTION
WITH HOW PEOPLE WILL BE
RESPONDING TO THIS OPINIONS
QUICKLY AGAIN TO HELP THE
AUDIENCE UNDERSTAND THIS.
THE HIGH FREQUENCY TRADING,
YOU ARE SAYING, IS OFTEN
ACCOMPANIED BY LESS
TRANSPARENCY IN WHAT IS
GOING ON?
>> THAT IS ABSOLUTESLY THE
CASE.
AND THAT IS WHERE A LOT OF
THIS CRITICISM DRAWS.
THE WHOLE MARKET OF HIGH
FREQUENCY TRADING HAS
GROWN-UP VERY QUICKLY IN THE
LAST FEW YEARS.
AND A LOT OF PEOPLE DON'T
UNDERSTAND IT.
WE DON'T SEE A LOT OF THE
WAYS THAT THE DATA AND THE
TRADES ARE PROCESSED JUST BY
THE WAY THE SYSTEM IS SET
UP.
SO THAT IS DEFINITELY A
MAJOR ISSUE FOR THIS.
AND IT'S SOMETHING THAT
PEOPLE WANT TO SEE MORE OF.
>> SO FINALLY WHAT HAPPENS
NEXT.
WHO GETS A CHANCE TO LOOK AT
THESE RECOMMENDATIONS AND
WHEN DO WE KNOW WHETHER THIS
ACTUALLY IS GOING TO TAKE
EFFECT?
WELL, THIS IS GOING TO BE A
PROCESS THAT THE SEC WILL GO
THROUGH.
AND THEY WILL BE KEEPING THE
PUBLIC UP TO DATE ON WHERE
THEY ARE IN THIS PROCESS.
OF COURSE THERE IS THIS
REVIEW PERIOD THAT HAS TO GO
ON HERE.
SO THIS IS DEFINITELY A WORK
IN PROGRESS.
IN A LITTLE WAIT AND SEE
MODE TO SEE ONE HOW THE
MARKET IS GOING TO REACT TO
THIS AND AT WHICH THE SPEED
WHICH THE SEC CAN PUT SOME
OF THESE CHANGES THROUGH.
>> KERI GEIGER WITH
BLOOMBERG NEWS, WE THANK
YOU.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
GENERAL MOTORS ANNOUNCED IT HAS
FIRED 15 EMPLOYEES OVER THE
DELAYED IGNITION SWITCH RECALL,
BUT AN INTERNAL REPORT CONCLUDED
THERE WAS NO COVER-UP.
PNT OBAMA SAID HE MAKES
"NO APOLOGIES" FOR THE DEAL TO
FREE ARMY SERGEANT BOWE
BERGDAHL.
AND TWO SENIOR SENATORS AGREED
ON A BIPARTISAN BILL TO LET
VETERANS SEE DOCTORS UNDERIN A T
TIMES AT V.A. HOSPITALS.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
RIGHT NOW HOW AN APPRENTICESHIP
CAN BE A TICKET TO THE AMERICAN
DREAM.
WE TALK TO A FORMER MARINE WHO'S
GETTING ON THE JOB TRAINING, AND
AN ALL EXPENSES PAID ASSOCIATE'S
DEGREE, THANKS TO HIS EMPLOYER,
B.M.W.
IT'S A FOLLOW-UP TO YESTERDAY'S
PAUL SOLMAN REPORT ON THESE
TYPES OF PROGRAMS.
THAT'S ON OUR MAKING SENSE PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AND AGAIN, TO OUR
HONOR ROLL OF AMERICAN SERVICE
PERSONNEL KILLED IN THE
AFGHANISTAN CONFLICT.
WE ADD THEM AS THEIR DEATHS ARE
MADE OFFICIAL AND PHOTOGRAPHS
BECOME AVAILABLE.
HERE, IN SILENCE, IS ONE MORE.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE REMEMBER D-DAY.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS AMONG
OTHERS
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.